Palestinian president Mahmud Abbas says
only the United States can stop Israel
from launching a ground attack on Rafa
now he was speaking at the world
economic Forum in the Saudi Arabian
Capital Riyad abas repeated his calls
for an end to the war in Gaza and for
Israel to allow in more Aid and he
warned Israel would try to push
Palestinians out of the occupied West
Bank after its done with Gaza Israel has
been threatening to launch a full ground
assault on Rafa where than 1.5 million
people are
Sheltering what is happening in Gaza
what will happen in the coming days and
what Israel will do by invading the city
of ruffa all the Palestinians from Gaza
are gathered in the city of Rua and only
a small blow remains to get them all out
then it would be the biggest disaster in
the history of the Palestinian
people we appeal to the United States of
America to ask Israel to stop the ruer
operation because America is the only
country capable of preventing Israel
from committing this
crime Zan mravi joins us now from rala
in the occupied West Bank so a statement
from the Palestinian president Zayn but
really will it resonate or have any
effect amongst the politicians where he
is or even you might say some impact
back
home well it is certainly a significant
statement it is the first time that
Mahmud Abbas has said anything like this
it is the first time a senior leader
from the Palestinian Authority has
said anything like this and not mined
his words but it has to be said that he
is simply echoing the things that
Palestinians we've been speaking to have
been saying for the last 6 months what
Palestinians have been suffering in Gaza
and across the West Bank for 6 months
and the reaction on the Palestinian
street is likely to mirror a broader
political response the people we've been
speaking to say that what they see is um
a a a a speech words from their leader
that is far too late and far too weak uh
one person described it as the musings
of an analyst not necessarily the speech
of a leader of a people that are under
attack and one person described it as
Mahmud Abbas seems to have hit his
expiration date and is no longer really
fit for purpose so in terms of the mood
here in rala across much of the West
Bank people have a deep a a lack of
faith in their political leaders at
these incredibly trying times for
Palestinians in Gaza and across the
occupied territories for the update
thanks very much Z BVI there for us in
rala Let's cross over to abdalaziz
alashan a researcher focusing on Saudi
foreign policy at Lancaster University's
sectarianism proxies and Des
sectarianization project he's live with
us from Riad good to have you with us on
the program has president abas sort of
missed an opportunity here to emphasize
how important for Arab Nations you might
say to include Palestinians or the
Palestinian voice in a future economic
decision sort of cementing a a
commitment that Palestine will be a
state and one to do business with a sort
of a psychological message could have
been sent out
here well first it's good to join you
thank you very much for having me I I I
agree I think as as a researcher and
analyst of Sav foreign policy towards
Israel and the pal Palestinian Israeli
conflict uh I've always been consumed in
the past few few years really of how can
we generate more uh Arab support for the
Palestinian issue or how can at least
for example Mahmud Abbas and and and a
diplomatic discourse can attract um uh
Arab support and I think personally
while we all support Mahmud Abbas and
his in in in trying to call for uh a
cessation of hostilities and and warning
of the looming attack on on ra I think
it was a missed opportunity personally
to to Really gain uh resonance with the
people and just say basically listen you
know here we are in in the world
economic Forum uh the we are talking
about Regional stability and then for
example uh Minister for the F Finance
Minister of Saudi Arabia was talking
about Regional security and development
uh and that we can't have Regional
security without uh Regional development
Etc that he could have said well it is
the occupation without an occupation uh
we we can't have Regional development
that basically we would love to
participate more and become more of
um he could have also let me just jump
in there he could have also stopped some
of the hypotheticals that are being sort
of muted around at the moment some
Regional capitals already talking about
the day after and we've heard this from
many quarters Saudi Arabia has said uh
certainly one of the last statements a
couple of months was no normalization
with Israel until a two-state solution
is firmly in place is that a red line do
you think that Saudi Arabia is not going
to Cross or is it a position that could
be a flexible one depending on the
ground
realities I'll be very honest I think as
much as it's an ideal situation uh the
the position was always a a holding
position it was a starting point of
negotiations uh and basically when it
comes to the Saudi position regarding
the Palestinians the essence is yes a
Palestinian State uh but I think more
essentially it is what the Palestinian
Authority will
accept uh and therefore when one has
that position and and Saudi officials
historically have been you know on the
record for saying you know what is good
for them is good for us as then good for
them Palestinians is good for us and
therefore what does this mean this means
that there is a negotiative process
taking place of course you know this
cannot be separated from the American
Saudi situation or negotiations taking
place as well so there is a great deal
of balancing and also there's a great
deal of uh moving parts that we just you
know it's it just makes it very
difficult to see normalization there are
there are those moving Parts because
consensus is required here isn't it the
world economic Forum because before the
US Secretary of State arrives one would
assume that you need United Arab voice
especially at this moment in time at
such a delicate time when Rafa is the
focus because a divided voice only
emboldens Israel and its
supporters yes well this is exactly what
I think they're trying to do that's why
yesterday was an important signal I
think by meeting uh having a a CO the
Arab coordinative group the six member
Arab coordinated uh coordination group
on the Min ministerial coordination
group met yesterday and I think it was a
sign or or another attempt to kind of uh
create
another unified front at least publicly
uh to illustrate the fact that this is
where the era position is going to Mo
going to be this is where the position
of those who are going to play an active
role in in the day after in Gaza uh are
uh where they're at and basically the
situation now is that the United States
can't do it alone it needs Arab Partners
Arab Partners also the Arab states know
that they can't do it alone and this war
has unfortunately more One Big Mess
where there's to be an external uh
intervention uh an external proactivity
um therefore it's to coordinate this
proactivity no one could do this alone
without saying with that said the United
States is the only actor that could
provide political leverage on Israel and
that's what the Saudis and the Arab
states are doing they're saying
basically listen but we we have we could
do we could deliver on certain things we
can't deliver on Israel this is what
we're ready to do for the day after now
you have to deliver on Israel and what
they're going to do for the day after
that was the coordinated un unified
stats and we will see what happens as we
unpick this throughout our news out for
the moment Abdul aiz alashan thanks for
joining us from
riet my pleasure thank you for having me
make sure to subscribe to our channel to
get the latest news from Al jazer